[ENH] Inheritance principle: Relaxation allowing multiple files per directory (#1003)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/99-appendices/15-inheritance-principle.md

metadata files from which metadata are applicable.
This Appendix provides the precise definition of how this principle operates
and the consequences of such,
as reference for both software implementations and advanced BIDS users.

## Rules

1.  Any metadata file (such as `.json`, `.bvec` or `.tsv`) MAY be defined at any directory level.

1.  For a given data file, any metadata file is applicable to that data file if:
    1.  It is stored at the same directory level or higher;
    1.  The metadata and the data filenames possess the same suffix;
    1.  The metadata filename does not include any entity absent from the data filename.

1.  A metadata file MUST NOT have a filename that would be otherwise applicable
    to some data file based on rules 2.b and 2.c but is made inapplicable based on its
    location in the directory structure as per rule 2.a.

1.  If, for a given data file, multiple metadata files satisfy criteria 2.a-c above:

    1.  The set of applicable metadata files is ordered as follows.
        Within each level of the filesystem hierarchy independently,
        applicable files are ordered from fewest to most entities;

>         each subsequent filename MUST possess a set of entities that is a
>         strict superset of the previous filename.

Reviewer: <details>
<summary>Here is my initial concern/comment on ordering and ambiguity issue without reading/comprehending it in full.</summary> 

this does not address the ordering question for when number of entries is identical but different. e.g. `task-rest_bold.json` and `acq-tricky_bold.json`. And that is the main concern IMHO for introducing proposed relaxation.  Sure thing we could introduce some "alphabetic ordering" but then 
- not worth bothering with "ordered from fewest to most entities"
- "not all entities born alike" effect and preferential treatment solely based on alphabet order. IMHO very suboptimal

In either of those sorting orders, it might add substantial cognitive load on a human to properly "sort" files to be inherited.  And that is what I praise *original* IP for, that even given its "complexity" it is still human friendly with its limiting factor (no more than 1 to inherit at any given level) since it gives at least 80% coverage to existing use cases.
</details>

Although "cognitive load" aspect might still be considered high, I came to opinion that 
- this rule is Ok
- better than sorting I thought of
- it would provide some relaxation although still forbiding having complimentary e.g. `task-rest_bold.json` and `acq-tricky_bold.json` though. 

Taking it further from that point: For that latter case we could have removed this requirement ("subsequent ... is a strict superset ...") and require that for such cases of unclear ordering, order is arbitrary but metadata files MUST NOT have identical metadata fields overloaded (thus order would not matter).  

```suggestion
        if multiple applicable files have the same number of entities,
        they could be ordered arbitrarily among themselves and they MUST NOT
        contain overlapping metadata.
```

It would be up for validator to ensure adherence to such a principle. This would "relax" inheritance principle further and allow for arbitrary combinatorics if so desired for some studies, e.g. mix in of `_task-rest_bold.json` and `ses-pilot_bold.json`, `_space-X` and `_desc-Y` in https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-bep016/issues/32  etc.

Author: Personally, I would be in favour of this also. Partly for the capability as you describe, but also partly because it may actually facilitate *simplifying* the text. I'll make an attempt at explaining...

Currently, there is some clumsy text around attempting to describe the permissible ordering of sidecar files. It is necessary to describe such both with high accuracy in the appendix, and in the main text in a way that's comprehensible but not misleading.

With this proposed alteration, the text in the main specification could be simplified. It would basically be limited to rules 2a-c (written in a friendlier form); there would then be a "PS. There are circumstances where this isn't permitted due to ambiguity in the repeated definition of keys; see Appendix". So the ordering problem is not something that the typical reader would be expected to digest; whereas currently it's in there and it's not the easiest thing to follow.

For the IP itself, simplest would be to not permit *any* common keys within sidecar files within a single directory that are attributed to a common data file. So that would be changing your proposal to apply to all applicable metadata files within a single directory, not just those with the same number of entities. I *think* that in this hypothetical case, "number of entities" for ordering within a directory is an adequate substitution for rule 3a? I've failed to think of a limitation of such. Your more general solution of only forbidding collisions between sidecar files with the same number of entities is a little more powerful, it's just a little more complexity added to relevant softwares.

-----

Given that this isn't a trivial alteration of this PR, and it's far from guaranteed to achieve consensus given that there are already concerns with regard to complexity in this PR, I would suggest that this warrants its own PR. I would need to show the difference between the two not only in the text, but in the examples also: what's currently shown as impermissible would become permissible, and the complex example would need to be augmented to show two files in a directory with an equal number of entities being loaded in arbitrary order.

Reviewer: > ...  to not permit any common keys within sidecar files within a single directory that are attributed to a common data file. 

Sounds good to me!

> I would suggest that this warrants its own PR.

well, although there is indeed incremental (relaxing restriction) in proposed change, its formulation would be in large conditioned on this PR, then we would have two PRs for people to digest, and first wait for this (already 6 months "in review") PR to be accepted.   But I am ok with that -- I do not have pressing need for it besides may be "be done with it once and for all"! ;)  So overall -- up to you.  As I have mentioned above, this formulation is "Ok" with me.

Reviewer: thought to file a dedicate issue for that extra relaxation but then realized that it cannot then go as "wild" as you suggested:

> not permit any common keys within sidecar files within a single directory that are attributed to a common data file. 

be cause with this PR it would be permitted but overloaded through the order...  and would not address 
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/1182 . So I guess I will file it for the formulation I suggested -- only within the group of the same number of entities.

Reviewer: filed a dedicated https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/1195 so let's resolve this conversation

>         These lists are concatenated in order of highest to lowest level in the
>         filesystem hierarchy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Levels of the filesystem hierarchy considered from the highest (top directory of the dataset) to lowest (folder with data files for a subject/session) level.
```
- `list` provides a somewhat "implementation dependent" detail, and not even mentioned in prior sentences
- not sure if we should try to similarly dissolve `Set` and just say "Applicable metadata files ..."?

Also wanted to provide explicit hint on highest/lowest, since depending how you would look for filesystem tree, e.g. root of a tree in nature is at its lowest level, and you climb up to tree to get higher.

Reviewer 2: I am very concerned about the proposed rule: 

> +Where more than one metadata file is applicable to a data file,
> +the contents of the file closest in filesystem position to the data file
> +(lowest in the directory hierarchy, most entities in the file name)
> +takes precedence.

I believe this is the **opposite** of how it currently is specified and how all of the tools work. 

Currently, a key in a JSON file at the top level cannot be overridden by keys at the lower level. 

If the proposed changes are to be made, I think this needs a much broader discussion by a broader audience. 
@sappelhoff @rwblair

Author: Yep, I used "list" to refer to the set of applicable metadata files within a single level of the filesystem hierarchy, and there is then an ordering of those lists, but failed to define such.

I've been constantly battling to find a reader-friendly way to convey the fact that there are two "sorting mechansims": firstly down the filesystem hierarchy, and secondly within individual directories. I was trying to convey the idea that you first do a scan through to find all applicable metadata files, and then perform a sort on them prior to loading their contents, as opposed to just traversing and loading as you go. 

> Also wanted to provide explicit hint on highest/lowest, since depending how you would look for filesystem tree, e.g. root of a tree in nature is at its lowest level, and you climb up to tree to get higher.

-   I think I've had this discussion once before w.r.t. BIDS: The convention around here was that root = highest and one traverses down, and with my first contribution I had it the other way around.
-   I don't know the extent to which this is a globally accepted standard; it doesn't appear in "common principles", and maybe it should.
-   I'm slightly hesitant to briefly provide exemplars of highest / lowest levels given that there is some chance of the depth of the filesystem tree in BIDS increasing; see https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-bep016/issues/50.

Reviewer: > I've been constantly battling to find a reader-friendly way to convey the fact that there are two "sorting mechansims": firstly down the filesystem hierarchy, and secondly within individual directories.

Just an observation which might (or not) help out: **are there really multiple mechanisms or is it just manifestation of one?**  Due to the fact that sub- and ses- are also entities, and they are stripped off the filename as you go higher (closer to root) in the hierarchy -- sorting by number of entities generalizes across filesystem hierarchy.

Author: Maaaybe. As per:

> I'm slightly hesitant to briefly provide exemplars of highest / lowest levels given that there is some chance of the depth of the filesystem tree in BIDS increasing

, it would depend on whether or not such an expansion were to occur *and* whether all entities present at higher levels would be enforced to propagate down to all files at lower levels. It's possible that file names could start getting frustratingly long in such circumstances. So linking https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-bep016/issues/50 again.

I suppose my thinking was that:

-   If existing users are familiar with the directory-based inheritance, and that is a much simpler process to understand, then it should be presented as a two-stage process, such that only "power users" wishing to perform inheritance within a directory need concern themselves with this augmentation.
-   When it comes to software implementation, one is likely to perform the metadata inheritance as currently described: order within the highest filesystem level, then step down the filesystem, ordering within each level and then concatenating. It would not make sense to put all applicable files across all directories into a single list and then sort them, even if it would produce the same result.

I'll have a go at just improving the description, and we can re-assess.

Author: See what you think of https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1003/commits/290de6ed595e971cd8701fc4f3a4644c5d69c11c.

1.  Where multiple applicable [JSON files](#json-files) are loaded
    for one data file as per rules 4.a and 4.c:

    1.  Where the same key is present in multiple applicable metadata files,
        the final value associated with that key will be that of the file latest in
        the order in which that key is defined;
        any values associated with that key earlier in the ordering are overridden
        (though it is RECOMMENDED to minimize the extent of such overrides).

    1.  The requirement that applicable metadata files follow a strict ordering according to
        addition of entities applies individually within each level of the filesystem hierarchy;
        it is not necessary for the complete ordered set of all applicable metadata files
        across all filesystem levels to demonstrate strict addition of entities between
        sequential filenames.

    1.  A key-value being present in a metadata file earlier in the ordering but absent in
        any file later in the ordering does not imply the "unsetting" of that key-value.

    1.  Removal of key-values present in files earlier in the ordering based on the content

>         of files later in the ordering is not possible.

Reviewer: do you have any changes for this PR planned @Lestropie or may be it should be taken out of Draft mode and gain a chance to be Reviewed more closely and merged? ;-)

Author: Have made some proposed changes based on comment threads above.

I'm slightly unsure about pulling this out of draft given #1195. My suspicion is that maintainers would prefer to be making a decision between this PR and #1195 up-front, rather than merging this PR and then contemplating even further revisions to the IP; especially if the validator needs to be compatible with both for different BIDS versions. At some point I'd like to make a draft PR for #1195 using the code of this PR as the base, which would highlight the specific change being proposed in #1195.

I'm also very interested to hear from anyone responsible for the validator or popular BIDS APIs, since the proposed changes are *highly* consequential there.

Reviewer: well, I will then let you decide first which way to proceed (undraft this PR, or create one with #1195), since in principle I then should not even comment on "Draft" right, and there is only fractional value return from discussing something which has no potential on being merged ATM ;)

FWIW -- I consider this PR already a substantial improvement and #1195 resolution is not necessarily needed to proceed forward with it.

And FWIW - awaiting for feedback from other developers, in particular for a PR in Draft mode, might take another year.

    1.  The metadata and the data filenames possess the same suffix;
    1.  The metadata filename does not include any entity absent from the data filename.

1.  A metadata file MUST NOT have a filename that would be otherwise applicable
    to some data file based on rules 2.b and 2.c but is made inapplicable based on its
    location in the directory structure as per rule 2.a.

1.  If, for a given data file, multiple metadata files satisfy criteria 2.a-c above:

    1.  The set of applicable metadata files is ordered as follows:

        1.  Within each level of the filesystem hierarchy:

            1.  Obtain the list of applicable metadata files within that directory.

            1.  Sort this list in order of fewest to most entities.

            1.  There MUST NOT be multiple applicable metadata files that
                possess the same number of entities.

            1.  The set of entities in any filename within this list MUST be a
                strict superset of those present in the filename that precedes
                it within this list.

        1.  These lists are concatenated in order of highest to lowest level in the

>             filesystem hierarchy.

Reviewer: note that 'highest' vs 'lowest' is ambiguous, please consider suggestion I gave before: https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1003#discussion_r940232599
